[new post] GUI Challenges media scroller (#5310)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/building-a-media-scroller-component/index.md

scrolling areas to pack the viewport with categories and options. 

### Creating the scroller layout

It's important to avoid cutting off content in layouts or leaning on text
truncation with ellipsis. Many television sets have media scrollers just like
this one, but all too often resort to ellipsing content. This layout does not!
It also lets the media content override the column size, making 1 layout
flexible enough to handle many interesting combinations.

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/VFIcWLB6bnyYAszFzoE8.png", alt="2
scrolling rows shown. One has no ellipsis, which means it's taller and each
title is fully legible. The other is shorter and many titles are cutoff with
ellipsis.", width="800", height="501", class="w-screenshot" %}

The container allows overriding the column size by providing the default size as
a custom property. This grid layout is opinionated about column size, it's
managing spacing and direction only:

```css
.horizontal-media-scroller {
  --size: 150px;

  display: grid;
  grid-auto-flow: column;
  gap: calc(var(--gap) / 2); /* parent owned value for children to be relative to*/
  margin: 0;
}
```

> Which is used by the `<picture>` element to create our base aspect ratio: a box:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The custom property is then used by the `<picture>` element to create our base aspect ratio: a box:
```

> ```css/8-11

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```css/8-10
```

.horizontal-media-scroller {
  --size: 150px;

  display: grid;
  grid-auto-flow: column;
  gap: calc(var(--gap) / 2);
  margin: 0;

  & picture {
    inline-size: var(--size);
    block-size: var(--size);
  }
}
```

With only a few more minor styles, complete the barebones of the media scroller:

> ```css/8-9,11-13

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```css/8-9,11-12
```

.horizontal-media-scroller {
  --size: 150px;

  display: grid;
  grid-auto-flow: column;
  gap: calc(var(--gap) / 2); 
  margin: 0;

  overflow-x: auto;
  overscroll-behavior-inline: contain;
  
  & > li {
    display: inline-block; /* removes the list-item bullet */
  }

  & picture {
    inline-size: var(--size);
    block-size: var(--size);
  }
}
```

> Setting `overflow` sets the `<ul>` up to allow scrolling and keyboard navigation
> through its list and each direct child `<li>` element has its `::marker` removed
> by getting a new display type of `inline-block`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting `overflow` sets the `<ul>` up to allow scrolling and keyboard navigation
through its list, then each direct child `<li>` element has its `::marker` removed
by getting a new display type of `inline-block`. 
```

> The images aren't responsive yet though, as they'll burst right out of the boxes
> they're inside right now. Tame them with some sizes, fit and border styles, and
> a background gradient for when they're lazy loading:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The images aren't responsive yet though, and burst right out of the boxes
they're inside. Tame them with some sizes, fit, and border styles, and
a background gradient for when they're lazy loading:
```

for in a scroll view. 

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/jpOZQeMvnHwqiH0jatl7.png", alt="A
box is highlighted on the inline-end side of the last list item, showing the
padding and element have the same width as to create the desired alignment.",
width="800", height="272" %}

To trick browsers into putting the padding at the end of the scroller I'll
target the last figure in each list and append a pseudo element that's the
amount of padding desired. 

```css
.horizontal-media-scroller > li:last-of-type figure {
  position: relative;

  &::after {
    content: "";
    position: absolute;

    inline-size: var(--gap);
    block-size: 100%;

    inset-block-start: 0;
    inset-inline-end: calc(var(--gap) * -1);
  }
}
```

Using logical properties enables the media scroller to work in any writing mode
and document direction.

### Scroll snapping

A scrolling container with overflow can become a snapping viewport with one line of CSS, then it's on children to specify how they'd like to align with that viewport. 

{% Video
  src="video/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/hClUoh402H88dexfTpqS.mp4",
  class="w-screenshot",
  autoplay="true",
  loop="true",
  muted="true"
%}

> ```css/17-19

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```css/17-18
```

.horizontal-media-scroller {
  --size: 150px;

  display: grid;
  grid-auto-flow: column;
  gap: calc(var(--gap) / 2);
  margin: 0;

  overflow-x: auto;
  overscroll-behavior-inline: contain;

  padding-inline: var(--gap);
  scroll-padding-inline: var(--gap);
  padding-block-end: calc(var(--gap) / 2); 

  scroll-snap-type: inline mandatory;

  & figure {
    scroll-snap-align: start;
  }
}
```

### Focus

> The inspiration for this component comes from it's massive popularity on TVs,
> App Stores, and more. Many video game platforms use a media scroller very
> similar to this one, as their primary home screen layout. Focus is a huge UX
> moment here, not just a small addition. Imagine using this media scroller from
> your couch with a remote, give that interaction some small enhancements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inspiration for this component comes from its massive popularity on TVs,
in App Stores, and more. Many video game platforms use a media scroller very
similar to this one, as their primary home screen layout. Focus is a huge UX
moment here, not just a small addition. Imagine using this media scroller from
your couch with a remote, give that interaction some small enhancements:
```

  display: inline-block;
  outline-offset: 12px;

  &:focus {
    outline-offset: 7px;
  }

  @media (prefers-reduced-motion: no-preference) {
    & {
      transition: outline-offset .25s ease;
    }
  }
}
```

This sets the focus outline style `5px` away from the box, giving it some nice
space. If the user has no motion preferences around reducing motion, the offset
is transitioned, giving subtle motion to the focus event.

{% Aside %}
This focus state is an opportunity for unique 
and brand defining micro-interaction UX
{%endAside%}

### Roving index

Gamepad and keyboard users need special attention in these longs lists of
scrolling content and options. The common pattern for solving this is called
[roving index](https://web.dev/control-focus-with-tabindex/). It's when a
container of items is keyboard focused but only 1 child is allowed to hold focus
at a time. This single focusable item at a time experience is designed to allow
bypassing the potentially long list of items, as opposed to pressing tab 50+
times to reach the end. 

There's 300 items in that first scroller of the demo. We can do better than make
them traverse all of them to reach the next section.

> To create this experience, Javascript needs to observe keyboard events and focus
> events. I created [a small open source library on
> npm](https://github.com/argyleink/roving-ux) in hopes to make this user
> experience easy to achieve. Here's how to use its used in this demo for the 3
> scrollers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create this experience, JavaScript needs to observe keyboard events and focus
events. I created [a small open source library on
npm](https://github.com/argyleink/roving-ux) to help make this user
experience easy to achieve. Here's how to use it for the 3 scrollers:
```

`aspect-ratio`](https://caniuse.com/mdn-css_properties_aspect-ratio) is behind a
flag in Firefox but available in Chromium browsers or set top boxes. Since the
media scroller grid layout only specifies direction and spacing, the sizing can
change inside a media query which feature checks for aspect-ratio support.
Progressive enhancement into some more dynamic media scrollers.

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/ffm4hCXrnxKiLcBNNigP.png", alt="A
box with 4:4 aspect ratio is shown next to the other design ratios used of 16:9
and 4:3", width="800", height="324", class="w-screenshot" %}

```css/3,6,12
@supports (aspect-ratio: 1) {
  .horizontal-media-scroller figure > picture
    inline-size: auto; /* for a block-size driven ratio */
    aspect-ratio: 1; /* boxes by default */

    @nest section:nth-child(2) & {
      aspect-ratio: 16/9;
    }

    @nest section:nth-child(3) & {
      /* double the size of the others */
      block-size: calc(var(--size) * 2);
      aspect-ratio: 4/3;

      /* adjust size to fit more items into the viewport */
      @media (width <= 480px) {
        block-size: calc(var(--size) * 1.5);
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> If the browser supports `aspect-ratio` syntax, the media scroller pictures are
> upgraded to `aspect-ratio` sizing. Using the draft nesting syntax, each picture
> changes it's aspect ratio depending if it's the 1st, 2nd or 3rd rows. The [nest
> syntax](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-nesting-1/) also allows setting some small
> viewport adjustments, right there with the other sizing logic. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the browser supports `aspect-ratio` syntax, the media scroller pictures are
upgraded to `aspect-ratio` sizing. Using the draft nesting syntax, each picture
changes its aspect ratio depending if it's the first, second, or third rows. The 
[nest syntax](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-nesting-1/) also allows setting some small
viewport adjustments, right there with the other sizing logic. 
```

With that CSS, as the feature is available in more browser engines, an easy to
manage but more visually appealing layout will render.

### Prefers reduced data

> While this next technique is only available [behind a
> flag](chrome://flags/#enable-experimental-web-platform-features) in
> [Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary/), I wanted to share how little
> CSS I could add, and save a considerable amount of page load time and amount of
> data used. The `prefers-reduced-data` media query from [level
> 5](https://drafts.csswg.org/mediaqueries-5/) allows asking if the device is in
> any reduced data states, like a data saver mode. If it is, I can modify the
> document, and in this case, hide the images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this next technique is only available 
[behind a flag](chrome://flags/#enable-experimental-web-platform-features) in
[Canary](https://www.google.com/chrome/canary/), 
I wanted to share how I could save a considerable amount of page load time and 
data use with a few lines of CSS. The `prefers-reduced-data` media query from 
[level 5](https://drafts.csswg.org/mediaqueries-5/) allows asking if the device is in
any reduced data states, like a data saver mode. If it is, I can modify the
document, and in this case, hide the images.
```

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/PRhulaSe06O9XbM9V2hb.png",
alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="502" %}

```css
figure {
  @media (prefers-reduced-data: reduce) {
    & {
      min-inline-size: var(--size);

      & > picture {
        display: none;
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The content is still navigable but without the cost of the heavy images being
downloaded. Here's the site before adding the `prefers-reduced-data` CSS:

(7 requests, 100kb of resources in 131ms)

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/63Zcpf05AN5sarJxTHE9.png",
alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="841" %}

Here's the site performance after adding the `prefers-reduced-data` CSS:

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/nhNncPluLqgEabbRkKaG.png",
alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="841" %}

(71 requests, 1.2mb of resources in 1.07s)

> 64 less requests, that would be the ~60 images within the viewport (tests taken
> on a wide screen display) of this browser tab, a page load boost of ~80%, and
> 10% of the data over the wire. Pretty powerful CSS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
64 fewer requests, that would be the ~60 images within the viewport (tests taken
on a wide screen display) of this browser tab, a page load boost of ~80%, and
10% of the data over the wire. Pretty powerful CSS.
```
